# Consensus 
As a public blockchain, CENNZnet is designed to allow parties to reach consensus on the changing the state of the blockchain. For example, updating your account balance, without trusting each other, even when there are malicious participates who actively attempt to lie about the state to break the system and/or for financial gains. CENNZnet aims to be highly efficient commercial-grade blockchain, while also striving for a high grade of decentralisation and more individuals can participate in the consensus process. 

## Proof of Stake (PoS)
CENNZnet is a proof of stake chain. Unlike the Bitcoin-like proof of work chain, which uses computing power to secure the network and uses large amounts of energy, proof of stake blockchain uses **stake**, meaning that value is held by addresses on a node and the Byzantine Fault Tolerant (BFT) algorithm to secure the network. The BFT algorithm requires majority support from participating nodes (known as validators) who will sign votes for the proposed state change. Malicious behaviours and behaviours that do not conform to the protocol, such as voting multiple times, or proposing different states to different nodes (e.g. double spend attempt) would be penalised. Mathematically, the protocol is proven viable as long as more than 2/3 of the nodes in the network are not malicious.

For Pre-net launch, CENNZnet uses a combination of Aurand/GRANDPA consensus, based upon the [BFT algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Byzantine_fault) powered by PL^G and Substrate. Aura/GRANDPA (BABE/GRANDPA in the next version) is a hybrid consensus that increases the speed of the blockchain, with fast block production and intermediate finality using Aurand (BABE for next version), while also providing absolute finality in a longer term using [GRANDPA](https://github.com/w3f/consensus/blob/master/pdf/grandpa.pdf). This consensus protocol is subject to review and update.